QEMU backend (#195)
ocurrent/obuilder: doc/qemu.md

obuilder: [INFO] Exec "mkdir" "-m" "755" "--" "/var/lib/docker/test/result-tmp/dce4336e183de81da7537728ed710f2906e9f75431694d9de80b95a9d9ff1101/rootfs"
obuilder: [INFO] Exec "qemu-img" "create" "-f" "qcow2" "-b" "/var/lib/docker/test/base-image/windows-server-2022-x86_64-ocaml-4.14.img" "-F" "qcow2" "/var/lib/docker/test/result-tmp/dce4336e183de81da7537728ed710f2906e9f75431694d9de80b95a9d9ff1101/rootfs/image.qcow2"
Formatting '/var/lib/docker/test/result-tmp/dce4336e183de81da7537728ed710f2906e9f75431694d9de80b95a9d9ff1101/rootfs/image.qcow2', fmt=qcow2 cluster_size=65536 extended_l2=off compression_type=zlib size=42949672960 backing_file=/var/lib/docker/test/base-image/windows-server-2022-x86_64-ocaml-4.14.img backing_fmt=qcow2 lazy_refcounts=off refcount_bits=16
obuilder: [INFO] Exec "mv" "/var/lib/docker/test/result-tmp/dce4336e183de81da7537728ed710f2906e9f75431694d9de80b95a9d9ff1101" "/var/lib/docker/test/result/dce4336e183de81da7537728ed710f2906e9f75431694d9de80b95a9d9ff1101"
---> saved as “dce4336e183de81da7537728ed710f2906e9f75431694d9de80b95a9d9ff1101”
```

Moving on to the next stage in the build which is the `run` directive.

> First, `qemu-img` creates a snapshot of the current `resuilt` layer into

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, `qemu-img` creates a snapshot of the current `result` layer into
```

# OBuilder's QEMU Sandbox

This backend should work with any OS which can be booted in QEMU and
which can provide an SSH interface.

# Base Images

> These need to be provided as boot disks.  There is a `Makefile` in the

Author: I've added more detail:

`obuilder` requires a base image aka a root file system, to use as the basis of the container which it creates.  For example the `runc` backend extracts the root file system from a Docker base image, while a FreeBSD `jail` uses a FreeBSD installation on a ZFS volume.  `qemu` requires virtual _hard disks_ with the operating system preinstalled.

In order to use the the QEMU backend with `obuilder` base images need to be created. There is a `Makefile` in the `qemu` directory which builds several base images:

> These need to be provided as boot disks.  There is a `Makefile` in the

Reviewer 2: The clarification helps me a *lot*. Thank you!

> `qemu` directory which builds several base images:

Author: done

- ubuntu-noble-amd64-ocaml-4.14.2.qcow2
- ubuntu-noble-amd64-ocaml-5.2.0.qcow2
- ubuntu-noble-riscv64-ocaml-4.14.2.qcow2
- ubuntu-noble-riscv64-ocaml-5.2.0.qcow2
- openbsd-67-amd64-ocaml-4.14.2.qcow2
- openbsd-67-amd64-ocaml-5.2.0.qcow2
- windows-server-2022-amd64-ocaml-4.14.2.qcow2
- windows-server-2022-amd64-ocaml-5.2.0.qcow2

> The base images build automatically using Cloud Init on Ubuntu,

Author: The base images build are build using `make ubuntu`, `make windows` or `make openbsd`.  The builds are unattended builds requiring no manual intervention. Cloud Init is used on Ubuntu, `autounattend.xml` on Windows and `autoinstall` on OpenBSD.

> The base images build automatically using Cloud Init on Ubuntu,

Reviewer 2: I think I just don't quite understand what "automatically" means here,, as is. Could this be clarified along these lines?

```
When building the base images, the makefile recipe will automatically use Cloud Init on Ubuntu,
```

`autounattend.xml` on Windows and `autoinstall` on OpenBSD.

Use `make ubuntu`, `make windows` or `make openbsd`.

# Operation

A spec which reference the required base image in using the `from`

> directive, then run the whatever commands are required.  An trivial

Author: yes, noted -- too many rewrites!

> directive, then run the whatever commands are required.  An trivial

Reviewer 2: I know how that goes!

> example is given below.

Author: Added

```
(
 (from windows-server-2022-amd64-ocaml-4.14.2)
 (run
  (run (cache (opam-archives (target "c:\\Users\\opam\\AppData\\local\\opam\\download-cache")))
  (shell "opam install tar")
 )
)
```

> A typical invocation via `obuilder build` would be as below.  Note that

Author: Updated.

> in this example, the base images would be in `/var/cache/obuilder/base-image/*.qcow2`.

Author: No, the base image are produced in whatever folder you run the `Makefile` in.  The point here is that the `FETCHER` in `qemu_snapshot` is expecting the base images to be available in the `base-image` subfolder of the configured store directory.  `obuilder build --store=dir ...`.  I've made it clear in the doc.

> in this example, the base images would be in `/var/cache/obuilder/base-image/*.qcow2`.

Reviewer 2: Yep, your changes make this very clear. Thanks!

```
obuilder build --store=qemu:/var/cache/obuilder -v -f test.spec --qemu-memory 16 --qemu-cpus 8 --qemu-guest-os windows .
```

The `from` directive causes `qemu-img` to create a snapshot of the base
image and stage it in the `result-tmp` folder.  When this completes
successfully, `result-tmp` is moved to `result`:

```
(from windows-server-2022-amd64-ocaml-4.14)
obuilder: [INFO] Base image not present; importing "windows-server-2022-amd64-ocaml-4.14"…

> obuilder: [INFO] Exec "mkdir" "-m" "755" "--" "/var/lib/docker/test/result-tmp/dce4336e183de81da7537728ed710f2906e9f75431694d9de80b95a9d9ff1101/rootfs"

Author: An early working directory.  I needed lots of space and my Docker partition was large...  I've searched and replaced to make the names consistent.

can be selected using `--qemu-guest-arch` parameter.  At the moment only
AMD64 and RISCV64 are implemented in obuilder.

```
obuilder build --store=qemu:/var/cache/obuilder -v -f test.spec --qemu-memory 16 --qemu-cpus 8 --qemu-guest-os linux --qemu-guest-arch riscv64 .
```

By default, guests are given 30 seconds to boot and respond to SSH.
If you have slower hardware, you can add `--qemu-boot-time` to allow more
time of the machine to boot.

# Cache

Caching is implemented using additional hard disks which are added
to the machine and mounted on the cache location.  Different guest
operating systems will require different filesystems to be available.
The `Makefile` builds suitable empty disks to be used as cache disks.

The `spec` file could account for the different cache disks by using
`opam-archives-XXX` rather than just `opam-archives`.  e.g.

```
run (cache (opam-archives-ntfs (target "C:\\Users\\opam\\AppData\\Local\\opam\\download-cache")))
```

# Importing the project source

Obuilder uses `tar` to copy the project source into the sandbox.
Attempts to use `tar -xf - . | ssh opam@localhost -p 60022 tar -xf -`

> fail as the data is corrupted.  This can be show also with `cat test.file

Author: Other than it only occurs when using Cygwin, no.  It's some kind of buffer issue as `x` bytes was fine, but `x+1` bytes failed.  `x` varied between machines I tried.  I thought it was QEMU networking, but I tried it on real hardware, and the same problem exists.  Google found previously resolved issues matching the description, but those fixes had already been incorporated into the version we were using.

> fail as the data is corrupted.  This can be show also with `cat test.file

Reviewer 2: Oh interesting! Thanks for the color :D

| ssh opam@localhost -p 60022 sha256sum -` where files of < 1M work most
of the time, but larger test files give a different hash everytime.

An alternative would be to use `guestfish` as below.  This works, albeit
the NTFS file permissions aren't clean, but I'm not happy with it as
it requires knowing the partition number ahead of time - `/dev/sda2` -
which impacts the ability of this to work more generically.

```
let tar_in ~cancelled ?stdin ~log:_ _ config result_tmp =
  let proc =
    let cmd = ["guestfish";
               "add-drive"; result_tmp / "rootfs" / "image.qcow2"; ":";
               "run"; ":";
               "mount"; "/dev/sda2"; "/"; ":";
               "tar-in"; "-"; config.Config.cwd; ] in
    let stdin = Option.map (fun x -> `FD_move_safely x) stdin in
    let pp f = Os.pp_cmd f ("", config.Config.argv) in
    Os.sudo_result ?stdin ~pp cmd in
  proc >>= fun r ->
  if Lwt.is_sleeping cancelled then Lwt.return (r :> (unit, [`Msg of string | `Cancelled]) result)
  else Lwt_result.fail `Cancelled
```

> Windows ships with BSD tar in `System32` so we and that does work with an

Reviewer 2: Reads clearly!

# OBuilder's QEMU Sandbox

This backend should work with any OS which can be booted in QEMU and
which can provide an SSH interface.

# Base Images

`obuilder` requires a base image aka a root file system, to use as
the basis of the container which it creates.  For example the `runc`
backend extracts the root file system from a Docker base image, while
a FreeBSD `jail` uses a FreeBSD installation on a ZFS volume.  `qemu`

> requires virtual _hard disks_ with the operating system preinstalled.

Reviewer 2: I find this super clear, concise, and instructive.

In order to use the the [QEMU](https://www.qemu.org) backend with
`obuilder` base images need to be created. A [Makefile](../qemu/Makefile)
is provided which builds several base images:

- ubuntu-noble-amd64-ocaml-4.14.2.qcow2
- ubuntu-noble-amd64-ocaml-5.2.0.qcow2
- ubuntu-noble-riscv64-ocaml-4.14.2.qcow2
- ubuntu-noble-riscv64-ocaml-5.2.0.qcow2
- openbsd-67-amd64-ocaml-4.14.2.qcow2
- openbsd-67-amd64-ocaml-5.2.0.qcow2
- windows-server-2022-amd64-ocaml-4.14.2.qcow2
- windows-server-2022-amd64-ocaml-5.2.0.qcow2

The base images build are build using `make ubuntu`, `make windows` or
`make openbsd`.  The builds are unattended builds requiring no manual
intervention. Cloud Init is used on Ubuntu, `autounattend.xml` on Windows
and `autoinstall` on OpenBSD.

# Operation

A spec references the required base image using the `from` directive,

> then runs whatever commands are required.  An trivial to install the
> `tar` package from opam on Windows example is given below.

Reviewer 2: I think this is still missing a word or two, I suspect from a suggestion accepting clash. Maybe these are the right ones to add?

```suggestion
then runs whatever commands are required.  A trivial example 
showing how to install the `tar` package from opam on Windows 
is given below.
```
